I first wish to thank Tomas Petricek for enthusiastically supporting this work and my research interests and giving detailed critical feedback on publications. I'm particularly grateful for his continued and undiminished supervision after his departure from my institution. I also thank Stefan Marr for his supervision and for his feedback on papers, talks, and this dissertation.

Jonathan Edwards' collaboration on the formidable *Technical Dimensions* paper was indispensable and his presence in regular video calls has been welcome during many difficult periods of writing. I must thank Richard Gabriel for shepherding its submission to the 2021 *Pattern Languages of Programming* (PLoP) conference and thank the participants of the PLoP Writers' Workshop for their feedback, as well as others who proofread or otherwise gave input on the ideas at different stages. These include Luke Church, Filipe Correia, Thomas Green, Brian Hempel, Clemens Klokmose, Geoffery Litt, Mariana Mărășoiu, Michael Weiss, and Rebecca and Allen Wirfs-Brock. I also thank the attendees of the Programming 2021 Conversation Starters session and the Programming 2022 tutorial/workshop entitled "Methodology Of Programming Systems" (MOPS).

I must express my gratitude for the Future of Coding Slack channel for making me aware of Tomas' PhD opportunity in late 2018, and to Anil Madhavapeddy and Antranig Basman for writing my reference letters. I also thank Antranig for feedback on papers and countless stimulating discussions on subjects related and unrelated to this work. I've similarly enjoyed correspondence and chats with Stephen Kell and Hamish Todd on all sorts of interesting subjects that intersect with this one. 

Thanks to all those who worked at VPRI for the STEPS project; as an undergraduate, those papers reassured me that the unclear frustrations and ideas about programming I was having were actually legitimate after all. Particular thanks go to Ian Piumarta for the COLA work that inspired me so much; I hope this dissertation is a worthy step towards its vision. I would be remiss not to mention Dan Cook, whose shared interest in these themes through 2018 was a strong motivator for my embarking on this journey. Whenever I began to doubt my ultimate goals, I'd re-read his lucid explanations on the Cemetech forums and remember that they did make sense after all.

At this point, my mind is inexorably drawn to a crossed-out name in one of dissertations in the School's collection. I shall restore balance to the cosmos by expressing my appreciation for Daria's love and support during my research, and for our continued friendship since going our separate ways. Let me also thank my family, office colleagues and anyone who has slipped my mind for their company along this most challenging of my accomplishments.
